so let's recap what we've learned about
the for statement so here we have a
for loop structure on screen so we've
got the initialization part where we
initialize variables or variable in this
case then the condition which determines
when the loop ends the last part is the
increment also known as the iterator or
iterator step so in other words one
execution of the loop step is known as
one iteration so in the increment part
we could increment by one or five or or
decrement by any number it depends on
the situation and specifically what you
type in there so we say that the loop
iterates in other words it loops or
executes a block of code when the
condition is true in steps and those
steps are called iterations and then the
loop stops when the condition is false
the block of code is defined by curly
braces in the loop body we can have
multiple statements those statements
will execute every step or we can say
that they'll execute every iteration and
notice this semicolon after the init
and the condition those semicolons are
required alright so in this scenario
in this case we've got the for loop that
just prints out the value of some number
of the number variable the init part is
int number equals one so we're standing
at one condition
showing on the screen is number less
than seven and the increment is number
plus equal to so in other words we're
incrementing the number variable by two
so this for loop will print every second
number so as you can see the outputs
showing at the bottom of the screen is
number equals one number equals three
number equals five it just prints those
three numbers and noting that it didn't
print the number seven because the
condition was less than seven but let's
just go through step by step through the
loop iterations so it's easy to
understand so on this screen we've got
different numbers showing what the
different steps are so I'm going to call
those steps just to make it clear so the
first one if the highlight the red
circle in number one that's where we
initialize the variable number two one
next number two is we're checking the
condition and the condition we're
checking for is if number is less than
seven
now if the condition is true
and in this case we've got number less
than seven our number is 1 because we've
initialized that in step 1 so therefore
that's true since 1 is less than 7 so
the loop executes a block of code in
this case and the code we've got in
there is a system dot out dot print line
and it prints the number one to console
or prints number equals 1 to the console
so the current outport is number equals
1 then it increments the number by 2 in
other words the iteration step executes
and that was step four and just to be
clear step three there on the screen was
where it was actually executing the line
in the code block to print out the
number so at the end of the fourth step
we've added two to the number and number
was one we've added two to that so its
now 3 so now the value of number is 3
and we start the next iteration we're
going back to step 2 to check for that
condition alright so here we are with a
number now set to 3 this is the second
iteration again it's 3 because it was
incremented in the previous step so
again the conditions checked and we're
checking in step 1 there on the screen
and we've got now number less than 7
which is 3 less than 7 so that condition
is also true so it prints a number equal
to the console and again in steps 3 on
the screen we were executing the
iteration or we're adding 2 to 3 the
current value of number so number now
becomes 5 3 plus 2 is obviously 5
so the number variable we set to 5 and
then we actually go through the next
iteration of the for loop ok so here we
are with the number now being a 5 so
we've had 2 iterations and again the
condition is checked and 5 is less than
7 that condition is true so it prints
the number equals 5 to the console and
you can see the output at the bottom
of the screen there and obviously step 2
is executing that code to print the
output and again in step 3 of the
increment side of things we're adding 2
to the number variable again currently
it's 5 so 5 plus 2 is 7 so the value of
the number variable after the increment
is now 7 then we move on to the next
iteration okay so here we've got the 3
lines of output number equals 1 number
equals 3 number equals 5 so now the
number is 7 since it was incremented in
the previous step so since it was
incremented it's now 7 so again the
condition is
checked in step one on the screen and
we've got seven less than seven but now
that condition is false so the loop
exits at this point and the code in the
code block is not executed the code will
continue after the closing curly brace
and you can see the arrow pointing to
that in step two it jumps to that part
of the code and in this scenario we
don't have any other code after the last
curly brace right so that's one scenario
here's another four loop in this case
this for loop will never execute can you
figure out why it won't execute you can
pause the video here and try to figure
it out so pause the video now and then
come back when you're done and I'll show
you the reason why and also show
you the output so how did you go did you
manage to figure out why this code will
never execute well this was a tricky one
there's really no output at all so let's
move on to the next slide and see why
there isn't any output so the loop will
never execute in other words it'll never
print out anything and that's because
the condition is false so firstly in
step one we're initializing the number
variable to one the conditions then
tested it in step two and the condition
is number less than zero but since one
which is the value of number is not less
than zero the code block will never
execute so in other words that's false
and the code jumps out and bypasses the
code in the code block and jumps as you
can see to the next line after the
closing brace so you really have to be
careful with conditions in a for loop as
you can see if the condition is wrong
it'll never execute at all so to fix
this loop to execute the code block we
have to change the condition for example
number less than five so in that case it
would then printing up the numbers one
and three before closing down and
exiting so here's another for loop can
you guess what this will print if you
like pause the video and try to figure
out what will be printed from this pause
the video now and come back when you're
done and I'll show you the output and
explain what will happen so how did you
go did you manage to figure that out
well this was again a tricky one so
let's see what is happening with this
one so in this case the loop will
basically loop forever
so here we've got condition greater than
zero but we're also incrementing the
number so every number greater than 100
is always greater than zero so in other
words this kind of loop is called an
endless loop but the program will
actually stop once it gets to a maximum
value of an integer in many cases with
endless loops programs might block
forever or crash when it runs out of
memory so how would we fix this to avoid
the program effectively hanging and not
actually exiting well what we could do
there is for example change the
condition to number 130 so that way
we print the hundred 110 and 120 and the
console so you can see in the output on
the screen and that's because we've
changed the condition which was number
greater than zero to now number less
than 130 all right so I hope you got a
lot out of this video and just one last
thing
there's also another variation of the
for loop called the for each but we're
not discussing that here the reason for
that is we really need to be talking
about arrays and objects before going
into for each and then we'll make sense
later and you'll see the for each which
again is a variation of the for loop in
future videos in this course so that's
it I'm going to end this video now and
I'll see you in the next one